---
layout: post
title: "Reference Pictures in H.264/AVC"
date: 2016-07-02
---

Okay, let us look at how we can signal the modifications in the reference picture lists, if any, to the decoder. We will use specific fields of the slice headers for this job.

### Changing the number of active reference pictures

When set, the flag called <code>num_ref_idx_active_override_flag</code> 
 in the slice header signals overwriting the <code>num_ref_idx_l0_active_minus1</code> and <code>num_ref_idx_l1_active_minus1</code> 
 values in the PPS for the current slice (and only for the current slice) with the corresponding values in the slice header. 
 The end result is that, at the decoder side, all entries of the reference lists past the corresponding positions are ignored.

### Changing the order of the reference pictures in the list

Sometimes we might want to reorder the reference frame list just for a particular slice. When such a change is made, the flag `ref_pic_list_reordering_flag_l0` in the slice header needs to be set to notify the decoder that there is a change. This is followed by inserting a pair of values for `reordering_of_pic_nums_idc` and `abs_diff_pic_num_minus1` fields for each reordering we have. 

Basically, n<sup>th</sup> such syntax pair signals the `frame_num` offset of the reference frame that will be placed n<sup>th</sup> in the list. The absolute value of the offset is given by `abs_diff_pic_num_minus1+1`, while the sign is determined by `reordering_of_pic_nums_idc`. Then the frame, for which `frame_num = last_reordered_frame_num + offset`, is put in the n<sup>th</sup> place in the list, while the rest is shifted. The initial value of the `last_reordered_frame_num` is the `frame_num` of the slice, and it is updated with each reordering. Obviously, the number of the reorderings cannot exceed `num_ref_idx_l0_active_minus1+1`. 
  
### Marking the decoded reference pictures 

Finally, we can mark a reference picture as *short-term*, *long-term* or *unused* by setting the `adaptive_ref_pic_marking_mode_flag` field in the slice header. Otherwise, the decoder falls back to the default sliding window reference picture marking mode. This flag is followed by a number of `memory_management_control_operation` fields, which is summarized as follows. 

| MMCO | Explanation |
|:-------------:|:-------------:|
| 0 | end the loop |
| 1 | mark short-term picture unused |
| 2 | mark long-term picture unused |
| 3 | mark short-term long-term |
| 4 | specify `MaxLongTermFrameIdx` |
| 5 | mark all ref. pictures unused |
| 6 | mark this picture long-term |
