---
layout: post
title: "Reference Pictures in libx264"
date: 2016-07-03
---
[**libx264**](http://www.videolan.org/developers/x264.html) is simply brilliant; it is today's fastest and the most bitrate efficient open-source H.264 encoder library. Sadly, I don't believe there's a good documentation out there for beginners. So, in this post, I will try to explain what is going on under the hood during the encoding. You can find the code in `encoder/encode.c` file under your default x264 folder.

In the code, each encoder thread is abstracted into an `x264_t` struct that holds the encoder state. You can find its declaration in `common/common.h`. Inside it, there are lots of sub-structs. Here is a few important issues, without any order. 

### Manipulating reference lists for encoding

Let's first go over some variables in the encoder.

1. **`h->i_ref[]`**: `int` array of number of reference frames for each list
2. **`h->frames.reference[]`**: `x264_frame_t*` array of reference frames of length `X264_REF_MAX+2` (2 sentinels). May contain both past and future frames.
3. **`h->fref[][]`**: `x264_frame_t*` table of final reference frames, 2-by-`X264_REF_MAX+3`.

Frames in (2) are distributed on (3) inside the `x264_reference_build_list()` function. Then both lists are [sorted](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bubble_sort) with respect to the distance to the frame (closer reference frames have smaller indices), using the `i_frame` variable. 

{% highlight c %}
#define XCHG(type,a,b) do{ type t = a; a = b; b = t; } while(0)
/* Order reference lists by distance from the current frame. */
for( int list = 0; list < 2; list++ ) {
  h->fref_nearest[list] = h->fref[list][0];
  do {
    b_ok = 1;
    for( int i = 0; i < h->i_ref[list] - 1; i++ ) {
      if( list ? h->fref[list][i+1]->i_poc < h->fref_nearest[list]->i_poc
          : h->fref[list][i+1]->i_poc > h->fref_nearest[list]->i_poc )
        h->fref_nearest[list] = h->fref[list][i+1];
        
        if( x264_reference_distance( h, h->fref[list][i] ) > x264_reference_distance( h, h->fref[list][i+1] ) ) {
           XCHG( x264_frame_t*, h->fref[list][i], h->fref[list][i+1] );
           b_ok = 0;
           break;
        }
    }
  } while( !b_ok );
}
{% endhighlight %}

The orders of the reference lists are double-checked in `x264_reference_check_reorder()`; if it is different from the standard's default, a reordering is signaled. Check out the code snippet below - according to the standard, list0 is ordered with respect to `frame_num` if we have a P-slice, while list0 and list1 are ordered with respect to `poc` in case of a B-slice. 

{% highlight c %}
for( int list = 0; list <= (h->sh.i_type == SLICE_TYPE_B); list++ ) {
    for( int i = 0; i < h->i_ref[list] - 1; i++ )
    {
        int framenum_diff = h->fref[list][i+1]->i_frame_num - h->fref[list][i]->i_frame_num;
        int poc_diff = h->fref[list][i+1]->i_poc - h->fref[list][i]->i_poc;
        /* P and B-frames use different default orders. */
        if( h->sh.i_type == SLICE_TYPE_P ? framenum_diff > 0 : list == 1 ? poc_diff < 0 : poc_diff > 0 )
        {
            h->b_ref_reorder[list] = 1;
            return;
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

### Signaling the changes in reference picture lists

Slice headers carry, among others, the information regarding the reference frames used to predict the current slice. In libx264, slice headers are of type `x264_slice_header_t` and they are initialized in the `x264_slice_init()` method, which then calls the `x264_slice_header_init()` method with the suitable arguments. Both of these methods involve copying the relevant state variables in the encoder object `h` (of type `x264_t`) onto their corresponding variables in the slice header `h->sh`. The actual byte-stream is written on the output file in `x264_slice_header_write()`.

Let's go over the slice header fields that signal the changes in the reference picture lists:

* If there is a deviation from the default number of active reference frames signaled in the PPS, we
1. set `h->sh.b_num_ref_idx_override` that corresponds to the slice header field `num_ref_idx_active_override_flag`.
2. enter the number of active reference frames in list X by changing `h->sh.i_num_ref_idx_lX_active` that corresponds to the slice header field  `num_ref_idx_lX_active_minus1`.
Both of these are done in `x264_slice_init()`:

{% highlight c %}
h->sh.i_num_ref_idx_l0_active = h->i_ref[0] <= 0 ? 1 : h->i_ref[0];
h->sh.i_num_ref_idx_l1_active = h->i_ref[1] <= 0 ? 1 : h->i_ref[1];
if( h->sh.i_num_ref_idx_l0_active != h->pps->i_num_ref_idx_l0_default_active ||
   (h->sh.i_type == SLICE_TYPE_B && h->sh.i_num_ref_idx_l1_active != h->pps->i_num_ref_idx_l1_default_active) )
{
 h->sh.b_num_ref_idx_override = 1;
}
{% endhighlight %}

* If there is a deviation from the default ordering of the reference frames in list X, we
1. set `h->sh.b_ref_pic_list_reordering[X]` that corresponds to the slice header field `ref_pic_list_reordering_flag_lX`.
2. enter the `idc` and `arg` pair(s) that will correctly signal the new ordering. Check out the final code snippet in `x264_slice_header_init()` - this is basically the algorithm mentioned in the [previous post](({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-07-02-ref-lists-in-h264 %})).

{% highlight c %}
sh->b_ref_pic_list_reordering[0] = h->b_ref_reorder[0];
sh->b_ref_pic_list_reordering[1] = h->b_ref_reorder[1];

/* If the ref list isn't in the default order, construct reordering header */
for( int list = 0; list < 2; list++ )
{
if( sh->b_ref_pic_list_reordering[list] )
{
    int pred_frame_num = i_frame;
    for( int i = 0; i < h->i_ref[list]; i++ )
    {
        int diff = h->fref[list][i]->i_frame_num - pred_frame_num;
        sh->ref_pic_list_order[list][i].idc = ( diff > 0 );
        sh->ref_pic_list_order[list][i].arg = (abs(diff) - 1) & ((1 << sps->i_log2_max_frame_num) - 1);
        pred_frame_num = h->fref[list][i]->i_frame_num;
    }
}
}
{% endhighlight %}
